‎In addition to being clear and accurate,
‎what should be the primary goal
of any Bible translation?
‎The answer is found
‎in the theme of our program this month:
‎“Father, Glorify Your Name.”
‎It’s based on Jesus’ words
‎recorded at John 12:28.
‎Let’s start by examining
the context of those words
‎as found in verses 27 and 28:
‎“‘Now I am troubled,
and what should I say?
‎“‘Father, save me out of this hour.
‎“‘Nevertheless, this is why
I have come to this hour.
‎“Father, glorify your name.’
‎“Then a voice came out of heaven:
‎‘I have glorified it and will glorify it again.’”
‎Jesus uttered these words
‎just four days before his agonizing death.
‎But even though Jesus was very troubled
‎about what was soon to happen to him,
‎what was his primary concern?
‎It was for Jehovah’s name to be glorified.
‎We today are likewise concerned
‎about the glorification
of Jehovah’s name and his reputation.
‎But how can someone
be glorified, or made famous,
‎if nobody knows his name?
‎Knowing God’s personal name, Jehovah,
‎is closely tied in with glorifying his reputation.
‎In fact, knowing Jehovah’s name
‎is the very first step in that process.
‎The June 2015 program of JW Broadcasting
‎discussed why God’s personal name
‎should appear in all translations of the Bible.
‎You might find it helpful to review that program.
‎But this month, we will consider
another aspect of this subject
‎that is far more controversial, namely,
‎Should the divine name appear
in the Christian Greek Scriptures,
‎or what is commonly called
the New Testament?
‎Many scholars who agree with us
‎that the divine name should appear
in the Hebrew Scriptures
‎disagree with our use of the same name
‎in the New Testament.
‎So, what prompted the translators
of the New World Translation
‎to restore the divine name 237 times
‎in the Christian Greek Scriptures?
‎The answer to that question
involves some fascinating events
‎that seem to be too amazing
to be just coincidence.
‎It also requires us
to do some detective work.
‎Sound intriguing?
‎It is!
‎So let’s start our journey together.
‎First of all, imagine that you
are back in the late 1940’s
‎—the time when
the New World Bible Translation Committee
‎was translating the book of Matthew.
‎As they started the project,
‎no doubt they realized
that Matthew’s account contains
‎many quotations from the Hebrew Scriptures.
‎Many of these contain the Tetragrammaton,
‎that is, the divine name
in Hebrew letters in the original text.
‎For example,
let’s consider Matthew 22:44.
‎This verse records Jesus
quoting the words of Psalm 110:1:
‎“Jehovah said to my Lord:
‘Sit at my right hand.’”
‎But did Jesus use the divine name
when making this quote?
‎Or did he substitute the divine name
‎with an equivalent such as “Lord”?
‎Well, the brothers would have realized
‎that many editions of the King James Version
‎did something
very interesting at Matthew 22:44.
‎In that verse, the English word “LORD”
‎is written in capital letters.
‎This technique is used
throughout the King James Version
‎to indicate where
the original Hebrew text uses the divine name.
‎So using “LORD”
in capital letters in this verse,
‎in effect,
acknowledges that the name of God
‎was originally in this quote.
‎The implication is
‎that Jesus used God’s name
when making this quote.
‎However, in the years prior
to the release of the New World Translation,
‎many scholars argued
that long before Jesus came to earth,
‎the Jewish people
had already removed the Tetragrammaton
‎from the Greek translation of the Hebrew text
—the Septuagint.
‎If true, that would mean
‎that copies of the Holy Writings
used in Jesus’ day
‎would not have contained
the divine name.
‎So, what should the Translation Committee do?
‎Should they use the divine name
in their translation or not?
‎This is where the story becomes intriguing.
‎Around that time,
some exciting discoveries
‎were made that proved those scholars wrong.
‎One of these discoveries
was documented by the brothers
‎in the foreword of the 1950 edition
‎of the New World Translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎It involved
some papyri copies of the Septuagint
‎that dated
back to around the time of Jesus.
‎What did these papyri fragments reveal?
‎Let’s find out in this documentary report.
‎In 1950,
‎the New World Translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures was released.
‎“I have the extreme pleasure of releasing
‎“the New World Translation
‎of the Christian Greek Scriptures!”
‎This translation was unique
‎in that it restored
the divine name, Jehovah,
‎237 times in the main text
‎of the so-called New Testament.
‎But how could they do that,
considering that for centuries
‎many Bibles did not use Jehovah’s name?
‎And why did the divine name
need to be restored?
‎The oldest copies we have available
‎do not use the divine name
‎in the Christian Greek Scriptures;
‎they use substitutes like God or Lord.
‎Very early on,
‎the copyists of those original manuscripts,
‎they simply replaced
‎—they got into the practice of replacing—
God’s name.
‎We know that this is not a translation
‎because one is a name
and the other one is a title.
‎And it’s not even
a synonym for Jehovah, for a name.
‎Since the Greek Scriptures
‎were an inspired addition
‎to the sacred Hebrew Scriptures and,
‎in fact,
‎Jehovah’s name, God’s name,
‎was used some 7,000 times
in the Hebrew Scriptures,
‎the sudden disappearance
in the Greek text is inconsistent.
‎Even though
the New World Bible Translation Committee
‎believed that Jehovah’s name should appear
‎in the text of the Christian Greek Scriptures,
‎they also knew that at that time
‎virtually all Bible scholars
disagreed with that belief.
‎Those scholars argued
that by the time of Jesus,
‎even the Greek translation
of the Hebrew Scriptures, the Septuagint,
‎no longer contained the divine name.
‎So why would the writers
of the New Testament
‎use the divine name when their copies
of the Holy Scriptures in Greek
‎did not contain the Tetragrammaton?
‎This view was based on faulty information.
‎How so?
‎Did the Septuagint still use
‎the divine name in Jesus’ time?
‎Let’s consider one piece of evidence
‎that answers this question.
‎Something amazing happened in 1944.
‎A theological journal published a picture
‎of a Greek Septuagint fragment
‎from the Papyrus Fouad 266 collection.
‎Now, inside that fragment
there was the divine name.
‎In the Greek text,
you had the Tetragrammaton,
‎not just once but throughout.
‎Now, this fragment was very old,
dating back to the first century B.C.E.,
‎but the important point is
that this was proof, clear proof,
‎that the divine name was originally there.
‎Two Jehovah’s Witnesses were asked
‎to obtain photographs
of these fragments,
‎which were located in Cairo, Egypt.
‎The New World Translation Committee
was very interested in this
‎because they started translating
‎the Greek Scriptures in 1947.
‎After obtaining permission,
pictures of 12 of the fragments
‎were published in the foreword
of the New World Translation
‎of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎What amazes me about this is the timing.
‎When our brothers
—this New World Translation Committee—
‎did their research, before even translating,
‎suddenly something that was unknown
‎until essentially 1944
‎came to light that confirmed
‎that the eternal name of God
‎had to be revealed;
it could no longer be hidden.
‎It should be shown to everyone
who wants to worship Jehovah.
‎This careful preservation
supports what Jesus said in prayer
‎at John 17:26,
when he said to his Father:
‎“I have made your name known . . .
and will make it known.”
‎As Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we are proud to be “a people for his name.”
‎Knowing his name
is essential to knowing Jehovah himself,
‎and the fact that Jehovah
has provided this arrangement
‎through his people
‎makes it very clear
‎that he was gathering
“a people for his name.”
‎This is why
this Bible translation is so beautiful,
‎because it brings us closer to Jehovah.
‎Jehovah is not just a Lord somewhere,
which could apply to anyone,
‎but he is Jehovah, our God.
‎He extends his hand to us and says, well,
‎‘I’m Jehovah; call me by that name.’
‎What an amazing find!
‎They found proof
that the divine name in Hebrew letters
‎was included in the text of the Septuagint
‎that would have been
available in Jesus’ day
‎and just at the right time
‎—the time when the members
of the Translation Committee
‎were making the decision
as to whether they should use
‎the name Jehovah in their translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎We are so happy that the brothers
were able to find this information
‎because these fragments
were not released for general publication
‎until much later in 1971
‎—years after the time when the committee
needed to make that vital decision.
‎But that’s not all!
‎Do you remember
what other important material
‎was discovered starting in 1947?
‎It was the Dead Sea Scrolls.
‎Many of these scrolls were dated
to around the time when Jesus was on earth.
‎And what did these scrolls
contain over and over again?
‎You guessed it
‎—the Tetragrammaton—
the divine name.
‎Isn’t it interesting
‎that these discoveries
were made around the time
‎when our brothers were translating
the New World Translation?
‎Is this just coincidence
‎or do you see Jehovah’s hand in this?
‎What has happened
in the years since that time?
‎It’s important to note
‎that the divine name is consistently used
‎in fragments of the Septuagint
‎that date from the first century B.C.E.
‎and the first century C.E.
‎This has led some scholars
to acknowledge the possibility
‎that Jesus and his disciples
‎used the divine name
when making these quotations.
‎But we need to remember
that Hebrew Scripture quotations
‎account for approximately one third
‎of the 237 times
‎the New World Translation
restores the divine name
‎in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎So, what about the other
two thirds of occurrences?
‎Well, this brings us
to the part of our program
‎that involves some detective work.
‎Imagine that you are a detective,
‎and you catch an art thief
‎who has stolen
over 200 original pieces of art
‎from various museums and art galleries.
‎This thief not only stole each piece of art
‎but he also substituted it with a copy.
‎So you need to start an investigation
‎and follow the clues.
‎First of all, you need to find out
‎where each painting was located originally.
‎Once you have verified
that fakes are hanging in those locations,
‎you would be in a position
to return the originals
‎to their proper locations.
‎In a similar way,
we have solid evidence
‎that a crime was committed
in the second and third centuries C.E.
‎Apostate Christians removed the divine name
‎from manuscripts of the Bible
‎and replaced it with Kyʹri·os,
the Greek word for “Lord.”
‎There is much evidence for this conclusion.
‎So they are like the art thief in our illustration.
‎They stole something valuable
‎when they removed Jehovah’s name
from the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎But we have a problem.
‎There are no copies
of the Christian Greek Scriptures
‎from the first century for us to examine.
‎The earliest existing manuscripts
‎that would have a bearing on this matter
‎date from the late second century onward
‎—a time when we know that the crime
had already been committed
‎and Jehovah’s name
had already been removed.
‎So how do we know where Jehovah’s name
‎originally appeared in the Greek text
‎before the apostates removed it?
‎Well, just like the detective in our illustration,
‎we need to start an investigation
‎and follow the clues.
‎To do our work properly,
‎we need to examine every time
the word “Lord” appears in the text
‎and see if it refers to Jehovah, to Jesus,
‎or to some other person with the title “Lord.”
‎Basically,
there are five clues that will help us
‎to find out where the original artwork,
‎that is, Jehovah’s name,
needs to be returned to.
‎Let’s scrutinize these clues.
‎The first clue is,
‎as we have already mentioned,
the easiest clue,
‎where the title “Lord” appears
‎in quotations from the Hebrew Scriptures
‎that originally used the divine name.
‎The second clue is
‎where the Greek text contains a Hebrew idiom
‎that would normally contain the divine name.
‎For example,
if someone says in English,
‎“He escaped by the skin of his . . . ,”
‎what word do you expect?
‎Teeth, not eye.
‎Yes, the expression is “skin of his teeth.”
‎This is similar with Hebrew expressions.
‎Some of these contain the divine name.
‎For example,
the expression found at Matthew 1:20
‎is “the angel of Jehovah.”
‎So whenever we find
a Greek translation of a Hebrew idiom
‎that uses the divine name,
‎this is another clue
that Jehovah’s name should be there.
‎The third clue
‎is where the term “Lord” appears
‎in the context surrounding a quotation
‎that is originally attributed to Jehovah.
‎An example of this is Matthew 1:22:
‎“All of this actually came about to fulfill
‎what was spoken by Jehovah
through his prophet, saying . . .”
‎The quotation
that immediately follows at Matthew 1:23
‎is taken from Isaiah 7:14.
‎This is a prophetic message
‎spoken by Jehovah through Isaiah.
‎The fourth clue
‎is when we see in the Greek text
‎where there is no definite article
before Kyʹri·os, the Greek word for “Lord,”
‎in places where the Greek grammar
normally expects a definite article.
‎This clue may indicate
that a proper name, such as Jehovah,
‎originally was there in the text
‎and was removed from later manuscripts
and replaced with Kyʹri·os.
‎To illustrate the importance of this clue,
‎imagine that you are a newspaper reporter
‎who is reporting on a car accident.
‎You report that Joe Smith,
the driver of the vehicle,
‎was killed in the accident.
‎But just before the story goes to press,
‎your editor informs you
that Joe Smith’s relatives
‎have not yet been notified of his death.
‎So you are told to remove
his name from the report.
‎You do that, but in doing so,
‎you forget to add
the “the” before the word “driver.”
‎What would happen?
‎Your report would say,
‎“As a result of the accident,
driver was killed.”
‎That sounds strange, doesn’t it?
‎It sounds like “driver”
is the name of the person killed.
‎That’s because you suppressed the name
‎and forgot to add the appropriate article.
‎That is similar
to what our symbolic art thieves did
‎when removing
Jehovah’s name from the Bible.
‎An example of this
‎is found in the Greek text of Mark 13:20.
‎“In fact, unless Lord had cut short the days,
‎no flesh would be saved.”
‎That sounds like “Lord” is a name,
‎and clearly it should be Jehovah’s name.
‎That’s why the New World Translation
restores the divine name in this verse.
‎However,
even in cases where the definite article
‎occurs before the word “Lord,”
‎there may be other strong reasons
‎for viewing “Lord”
as a substitute for the divine name,
‎like the ones we already discussed.
‎The final clue
‎is where the divine name
needs to be added to avoid ambiguity.
‎An example of this
‎is in Mark 5:19.
‎There, Jesus says to a man he healed:
‎“Go home to your relatives,
‎“and report to them all the things
‎Jehovah has done for you
and the mercy he has shown you.”
‎How do we know that “Lord”
here refers to Jehovah
‎and not Jesus?
‎Well, in recording the same event,
‎Luke 8:39 uses the Greek word The·osʹ (God),
‎supporting the thought
that Kyʹri·os (Lord) at Mark 5:19
‎is used with reference to Jehovah God.
‎So these five clues helped
the New World Bible Translation Committee
‎to ascertain where the name Jehovah
‎should be restored to the Biblical text.
‎In this way, they were able to right the wrong
‎that was committed by apostate Christians
‎in the second and third centuries or,
‎in other words, they were able to return
‎the figurative pieces of stolen artwork
‎to their proper places.
‎If you would like to review these five clues,
‎you will find a detailed explanation in Appendix C
‎of the Study Edition of the New World Translation.
‎You can either find this in the JW Library® app
‎or online at Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY.
‎In the same Appendix C,
‎you will find a list
of what we call J-References
‎that support these decisions.